# CANYUNs
Code for CANYUNs Manuscript

Quantifying cumulative phenotypic and genomic evidence for procedural generation of metabolic network reconstructions
Thomas J. Moutinho Jr., Benjamin C. Neubert1, Matthew L. Jenior, Jason A. Papin
University of Virginia, Department of Biomedical Engineering

Abstract
Genome-scale metabolic network reconstructions (GENREs) are valuable tools for understanding microbial community metabolism. The process of automatically generating GENREs includes identifying metabolic reactions supported by sufficient genomic evidence to generate a draft metabolic network. The draft GENRE is then gapfilled with additional reactions in order to recapitulate specific growth phenotypes as indicated with associated experimental data. Previous methods have implemented absolute mapping thresholds for the reactions automatically included in draft GENREs; however, there is growing evidence that integrating annotation evidence in a continuous form can improve model accuracy. There is a need for flexibility in the structure of GENREs to better account for uncertainty in biological data, unknown regulatory mechanisms, and context specificity associated with data inputs. To address this issue, we present a novel method that provides a framework for quantifying combined genomic, biochemical, and phenotypic evidence for each biochemical reaction during automated GENRE construction. Our method, Constraint-based Analysis Yielding reaction Usage across metabolic Networks (CANYUNs), generates accurate GENREs with a quantitative metric for the cumulative evidence for each reaction included in the network. The structure of a CANYUN GENRE allows for the simultaneous integration of three data inputs while maintaining all supporting evidence for biochemical reactions that may be active in an organism. CANYUNs is designed to maximize the utility of experimental and annotation datasets and to ultimately assist in the curation of the reference datasets used for the automatic reconstruction of metabolic networks. We validated CANYUNs by generating an E. coli K-12 model and compared it to the manually curated reconstruction iML1515. Finally, we demonstrated the use of CANYUNs to build a model by generating an E. coli Nissle CANYUN GENRE using novel phenotypic data that we collected. This method may address key challenges for the procedural construction of metabolic networks by leveraging uncertainty and redundancy in biological data.

Functions and Organization:
CANYUNs consists to a variety of functions that can be utilized to build a CANYUNs GENRE. All of the functions are contained in /Validation/functions. These functions are all demonstrated in /Validation/CANYUNs_Validation as well as /Validation/EC_Nissle_Reconstruction. All of the data used for both Jupyter notebooks is present in the same directory. For use of the functions, please clone the repository.